[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: We're
going to take a look
at the life of one
of the greatest
and most scandalous scientific
minds of the 16th century,
a man who heavily influenced
Queen Elizabeth's court.
His name is John Dee.
His hierarchical
understanding of unseen
forces reach into and
affect our world in terms
of religion and politics.
Jason Louv is here today
to share his research
on this amazing, fascinating,
confusing historical figure.
Welcome, Jason.
>>JASON LOUV: Thank you
for having me on, Regina.
>>REGINA: Wow, what
a beautiful work
you have done with your book.
It's absolutely amazing.
>>LOUV: Thank you.
>>REGINA: "John Dee and
the Empire Of Angels."
>>LOUV: Uh-huh.
>>REGINA: And you really put a
lot of really rigorous research
around it, where other
people have looked
at it more esoterically
and there's
a lot of conjecture
in some of the books,
I think you've really nailed it.
So this man is still--
his work, his influence, is
still reaching into our times
now, both in terms of
religion and politics.
And I think it's really
valuable for people
to understand the genesis of
some of this thought, some
of these philosophies.
So without further ado,
let's go into the life
and times of John Dee.
Give us a context
for his life, OK.
>>LOUV: Sure.
So the reason this
person is so important
is because in our culture, at
a certain point in our history,
science and magic diverged.
They used to be the same thing.
People who were
interested in science
were also interested in the
esoteric side of things.
And then they split and
they went their own ways.
And science became modern
science and magic kind of
went off into its own world.
But John Dee, who was
the scientific advisor
to Queen Elizabeth I and one
of the most brilliant people
of the 16th century,
the person who
was responsible for bringing
mathematics to the public,
for coming up with the
phrase, the "British Empire,"
and laying down
the plans for there
to be a British
empire, who really laid
the groundwork for
modern science to happen,
was also completely
fascinated with magic
and the esoteric world.
And is maybe one of the
most brilliant thinkers
that spirituality has produced.
And is one of the rare people
who synthesized the two.
And I say synthesized,
but really
they just hadn't separated yet.
And they were the same thing.
So in our modern world,
we're coming to a point
now as a culture
where these things are
starting to come back together.
And people are
interested in both,
are interested in science,
wonderfully so, and also
interested in
spirituality, and magic,
and the esoteric side of things
because they want something
deeper.
They want a deeper experience
of life and understanding
what being alive means.
But they want to figure
that out on their own terms,
without it being imposed
by, like, a top-down church
or something like that usually.
So for that reason, I think
he's a fascinating person
for us to learn from and
just to understand ourselves,
and where we've been,
and where we're going.
>>REGINA: I agree with that.
And to the point, Dean
Radin, a scientist
and paranormal researcher,
both, especially
in the world of
quantum entanglement,
just came out with a new book
called "Real Magic," right?
>>LOUV: Yes.
>>REGINA: And now starting
to boldly, even embrace
the title, to bring the
two together in this world.
So you're right
on target on that.
I think one of the
problems is that people
have learned to be very
polarized in their thinking
and do not understand that these
characters, throughout history,
most of them were very
"colorful people."
And we say, how can someone
who would do such a thing also
come up with such a thing?
And so we're going
to get into some
of that, some of the
contrast within John
Dee, his personal character,
also Edward Kelley,
who he associated with, who
brought through, channeled
information and help
people understand
and get comfortable
with the notion,
you don't have to be a saint
to be brilliant and make
a contribution to society.
And that's true today as well.
So Francis Bacon,
wasn't Francis Bacon
more or less a
contemporary in the day?
>>LOUV: He was very
inspired by Dee.
Bacon came after Dee.
And Francis Bacon, of course,
created the Baconian method,
which became empirical science.
But he was very influenced
by Dee's thinking.
In fact, all of these guys were,
Francis Bacon, Rene Descartes,
the early scientists who became
the Royal Society in England.
All of the early
scientists were totally
fascinated by Dee's
work because Dee
was the person who had laid
the groundwork for science
to happen.
But they were also interested
in magic and the esoteric.
They were fascinated with
the idea of Rosicrucianism
and the Rosicrucian
brotherhood, which
was this kind of story
that was being told
around Europe that there was
this secret group of people
working to enlighten Europe,
to bring science to Europe,
to get Europe away from the
domination of the Church.
This all comes from Dee.
Previously, you
mentioned that people
are very polarized in
their thinking now.
It's either magic or science.
And neither of these
camps talk to each other.
And I come across
this myself a lot.
My way of seeing it is
the same that they did,
which is there's really
only one thing going on,
which is humanity's
quest for knowledge,
and humanity's quest to make
life better and learn more
about the universe.
And the spiritual side of
things is a tool for that.
The scientific, purely
materialistic science side,
is a tool to do that.
But these guys were
thinking in one
big-- they were big
picture thinkers.
And that's the type of
thinking that I really
want to encourage.
We should be
thinking, how can we
make the best possible
scientific advances,
with science on its own plain?
How can we also bring people
the best spiritual technologies,
if you will, to make
them happy and foster
a sense of connection, and
well-being, and happiness
in life, understanding life,
and putting it in context,
and what it really is?
So I'm very inspired
by those guys.
And they were--
>>REGINA: Well, you're the
classic new representation
of a Renaissance man.
>>LOUV: Well, thank you.
I hope so.
>>REGINA: You are.
You truly are.
[LAUGHTER]
And so, at the same time,
when you look at Bacon,
for example, what
an incredible mind.
What many think to be
the actual, at least part
of, or if not, the better part
of the body of Shakespeare's
work, authorship of that.
I think that in
the intelligentsia
circles is kind of accepted.
But then also, under contract,
to rewrite the King James
version of the Bible.
And I mean, again,
how did you perceive
that part of his
role in the world,
to rewrite the Bible into
this everlasting, at least
the last few hundred years,
King James version of the Bible?
>>LOUV: Well, it's a
fascinating question.
And there was so much
going on at this time.
Those guys, both Bacon,
Shakespeare, John Dee,
of course, they were
all working together.
There was a lot going on behind
the scenes, some of which
is historically accepted and
some of which is conjecture.
But it's just very
clear to me, observing
that period in history, that
there was a group of very, very
intelligent people, a
real intelligentsia, who
were working with
everything they
had to modernize
Europe and bring
new ideas of spirituality, and
scientific advance, and world
exploration, and art, and drama,
in the case of Shakespeare,
and then, yes, the
modernization of the Bible.
And the fascinating
thing about all these
is the real common
thread with all of them
is the faith in the
liberation of human beings
from superstition and control,
the idea that human beings
should be free to
pursue happiness,
to pursue scientific truth,
to pursue religious truth
on their own terms.
Those are the ideas
that became America.
All of these things
were manifested finally
as the United States, which
was a project of these guys,
including Francis Bacon.
>>REGINA: The new Atlantis.
>>LOUV: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And it's
interesting because, again,
when we go into these layers--
and we'll wrap it up on Bacon
in a second and the King James
version--
here you have this--
again, this has withstood
some test of time.
The last I read, that there
were 26,000 versions of the New
Testament alone that exist.
But in this particular
one, the dominant one,
it's used almost in a
fundamentalist way because
of our lack of
nuance in thinking.
But if you look at it from an
intelligence point of view,
it's said to be
written in layers
of understanding for those
with eyes to see that.
It actually had quite a
lot of these Renaissance
understandings of magic,
science, and life embedded
in the actual text of the King
James version of the Bible,
if you can see it,
and see the patterns.
>>LOUV: Absolutely.
And if you look at it, there's
so many different versions
of the Bible.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LOUV: But if you look at the
King James-- and the King James
is not even necessarily the
most academically accurate one
because things have
moved around so much.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LOUV: But the language
is so beautiful.
The language is incredible.
And absolutely, there's
layered meaning in there.
You have to remember
that at this time period,
they didn't have TV.
They didn't have the internet.
So they loved to play
intellectual games.
I mean, people knew Greek.
They knew Latin.
They knew Hebrew.
They loved to play word
games, and puzzles,
and translate things
back and forth.
And that was how intelligent
people stimulated their minds.
And it was a common language.
So if you go back and look
at these things, which
I spent a lot of time
doing, writing this,
you see that you're dealing
with a much higher caliber
of thinking than is--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LOUV: --common now.
In the sense is, if somebody was
watching our TV shows a hundred
years from now,
they're not going
to get all the little jokes.
They're not going
to get little winks
and pop cultural references.
It's the same there.
But the winks and the
pop culture references
are layers of spiritual
meaning, and Kabbalah,
and Rosicrucianism,
and esoterism,
and, as you said, things
that are there for people
who have eyes to see.
And it's thrilling to
go back and find it.
>>REGINA: And it is, especially
when you open to the notion
that these men also had an
understanding of the cosmos.
And not just cosmology,
but astronomy-- astrology,
in Dee's case, and
understanding astrology.
So if we understand
that all of them
had a relative understanding
of our cosmological connection,
that we are universal
beings in a larger system,
then you start
reading these texts
and it starts looking
entirely different again.
So there are these
layers over layers.
And so that wraps
the Bacon part.
I just wanted to say that, yeah,
he did that under contract.
Yeah, it can be used in
a fundamentalist way,
just like any of the
work of these guys.
Or, yes, it can be
absolutely magical.
And that's up to us to develop a
nuance in our own understanding
and intelligence.
>>LOUV: It's important.
I mean, just to
wrap that up also.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LOUV: It's
important to realize
that for exactly the
point that you mentioned,
which is people go
back to that text
and read it totally
literally, totally
as a fundamental reading.
What they're missing is
all the layers of metaphor,
and simile, and then
the artistic metaphors.
And then underneath,
the artistic metaphors,
the coded meanings and Kabbalah.
>>REGINA: The cosmic,
and all of it, yeah.
>>LOUV: It's
beautiful, you know.
So you look at Shakespeare.
I mean, people can barely
read Shakespeare now.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>LOUV: You think about how
many layered meanings are
in Shakespeare
and you apply that
to the spiritual texts
of that time period.
And you can't make a
fundamentalist reading of it.
>>REGINA: No.
>>LOUV: It's too surface.
>>REGINA: Right.
So you're attempting to bring
back the nuance into all of it.
So let's go into his
understanding, Elizabethan
hierarchy of the day.
They did believe
that there was a God.
There were angels, and
there were intermediaries,
and demons, and so forth.
Let's talk about how John
Dee perceived that world.
>>LOUV: Absolutely.
So the Renaissance
view of the world
and the medieval view of the
world was basically this.
It's everything is one thing.
Everything that we see
that is perceivable is God.
And it's all one system.
And it works
functionally, perfectly.
And it's kind of
like a watch, where
all the gears are
wound up and everything
is working perfectly.
All the parts are
working perfectly.
And we've lost that.
Now, we see the world is
chaotic and meaningless.
>>REGINA: Everything separate.
>>LOUV: Everything separate.
I think that it's a flaw
in our consciousness,
rather than that our
understanding has changed.
But the way that people saw it
at the time was as a hierarchy.
You had God at the top,
followed by the angels, followed
by people, then followed by
animals, plants, minerals.
And then you got to the lower
spirits, the infernal realms.
But they saw everything
as interconnected.
Or holographic is the
best way to talk about it.
If you take a-- a
classic metaphor--
if you take a printed
hologram, not a projected one,
like a-- they used to have
hologram stickers that came in
and trading cards.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LOUV: Right.
So you take one of those and
you cut it up into seven pieces.
Each of the smaller pieces will
contain the entire hologram.
That's how people saw
reality as working.
For instance, if man
was made in God's image,
then you could understand God
by understanding the human
and by seeing nature.
And all these things
were in resonance.
There's the classic
William Blake line,
I could see eternity
on a grain of sand.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LOUV: That's basically
what they're talking about.
And that was a very comforting
worldview view for people.
It was a world where everything
made sense and was in order.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
There was an inherent
orderliness to it.
And so that was also John Dee's
own internal belief system.
>>LOUV: Uh-huh.
It was.
And it was the world view
of scientists at the time.
So now we think of science--
science had a very different
flavor at the time.
Now, we think of science
as moving forward
in time, as being progressive.
We're discovering new
things about the world.
In the Renaissance
period, the scientists
of the time, the
protoscientists,
believed that knowledge
was degrading over time,
instead of getting better.
They thought that
essentially perfect knowledge
had been given to mankind by
God in the Garden of Eden.
And then it was lost during
the fall of the Tower of Babel.
And more was lost during
the fall of Rome and Greece.
Remember, they were coming
out of the Dark Ages.
They were just
recovering knowledge.
recovering the knowledge
of the classical world.
So their view was
we have to go back
and recover what we've lost.
So they were looking
backwards and saying,
if only we can get to the
original knowledge that we had,
then we'll understand.
And John Dee's way of thinking
was even more extreme,
which was, what if we can
connect directly to God
and ask him?
And if we can't do
that, then maybe we
can talk to God's
angels at least,
who might be a bit more ready
to have a conversation with us,
a bit closer to our level.
That was their way
of seeing things.
And so John Dee pursued
this quest with everything
that he had because
he thought that that
was the way to learning,
to getting more light,
more knowledge.
>>REGINA: That's
perfectly logical.
I mean really, if
you take a babe
and let him grow
up naturally, this
is what we would
evolve to, is trying
to understand the invisible
principles that make something
so.
And so they were just,
I think, operating
on very natural principles
and asking that question.
And if you can bring it through,
through the hierarchy of beings
who inform, it makes
even more sense.
And then once
scientific materialism
became the religion, so
to speak, all of that's
been blocked.
And a massive amount
of real understanding
has been blocked at certain
levels, not at the top level,
but at that next tier down,
and the next tier down.
Because at the top
level, it seems
to be there are
always those who are
able to use both
realms of information,
all realms of information,
to their benefit
>>LOUV: Yeah.
I think that people who
are really intelligent
and naturally curious,
and who have not
lost their curiosity,
as so many of us
do because of how we're
educated and how our society is,
it's a natural way of thinking.
I think that people who
are naturally curious
see things in the
big picture way.
And they're just curious
about why are we alive?
Why are we here?
And they're not
afraid to look in lots
of different-- lots
of different areas
to try and understand
that question.
>>REGINA: Right.
Well, let's talk about the
other side of his personality.
He was all these
brilliant things.
Why was he in
prison for sorcery,
and conjuring, and all this?
[LAUGHTER]
And in addition, how did this
affect his need to really put
forth science in the world?
>>LOUV: Right.
So Dee lived in a very
politically dangerous period
of history.
England at the time had
just left the Church.
They'd kind of done
their own Brexit.
And Henry had separated
the Anglican church
from the Catholic church.
And so what that
meant was there was
war, spiritual war between the
Catholics and the Protestants.
And Queen Mary, who was Henry's
daughter-- when Henry died,
Queen Mary became queen.
And she was Catholic.
And so there was kind of
a Catholic reconquering
of England.
And a lot of people
were burned as heretics
or imprisoned as heretics
who were Protestants.
And then when she
died, then Elizabeth
came in, who was Protestant.
And so it was back and forth.
We've seen that fight on
even to the modern day.
In Ireland, for instance,
this is a serious thing.
So Dee was a confidante
and a friend of Elizabeth.
And at one point had been
asked by her actually just
to do astrological
charts, of all things.
That was it.
He had been asked to draw
birth charts of Elizabeth
and potentially Mary.
>>REGINA: Royalty has
always been interested
in astrology and
the big picture.
>>LOUV: Of course, to this day.
>>REGINA: To this day.
>>LOUV: It's kind
of their thing.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LOUV: It's big in England.
>>LOUV: But he was
found out doing this.
And this was a
punishable offense.
It was considered sorcery.
They assumed that
Elizabeth and Dee
were conspiring to somehow
use magic to unseat
Queen Mary from the throne.
All he'd done was
draw up birth charts.
But for this, he was imprisoned
in the Tower of London,
with other Protestant heretics.
He was tortured.
He was forced to reconvene
to Catholicism publicly.
It was a mess.
And he was in that situation
until the regime changed
and Elizabeth became queen.
So it definitely
changed his attitude.
Before that, you
have to remember,
this person was a pure
academic, somebody who was just
seeking after knowledge.
He truly believed in bringing
higher knowledge to humanity.
He truly believed
in England and doing
what was best for his country.
And I think it was very--
it definitely changed him
to get that treatment.
>>REGINA: How did it change him?
>>LOUV: Well, I think
as you mentioned,
he spent a lot of time trying
to resuscitate his reputation,
until the end of his life.
He was trying to convince
people that he was a true--
>>REGINA: He wasn't a nutter.
>>LOUV: --Christian.
He was a true scientist.
He wasn't a black magician.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LOUV: And they were
constantly accusing him of that.
The irony is that
the other side,
on Queen Mary's side
and the Catholic side,
they were using black magic
to try and get their goals,
and to attack the queen--
and Queen Elizabeth,
and all of this.
So it was a messy time.
>>REGINA: Anyway, OK.
Let's talk about math,
and his love of math
and how this feeds into his
esoteric understanding of life
even.
>>LOUV: Oh, it's fascinating.
I mean people hear math
and they immediately--
it's like an allergic reaction.
Oh, God.
But when you understand it
the way that Dee saw it,
it becomes totally fascinating.
Dee thought that math was the
language that God uses to talk.
It was that simple.
>>REGINA: He's not the only one.
A lot of people think this now.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
And he basically-- again, with
the backdrop of religious wars,
people fighting
over who's right,
Dee wanted to figure out,
well, what's the truth?
And the conclusion that he came
to, which I think is completely
accurate, is that-- and
I think more scientists
and mathematicians
would agree with it--
is that if we really want
to understand reality,
if we want to
understand what's true,
you have to go to
pure mathematics
because you can't fake it.
The numbers don't lie.
Statistics might.
But pure mathematics don't.
So he thought
that-- for instance,
that the fact that there are
mathematical constants that
repeat throughout nature,
like pi, phi, and e, and all
these things, the Fibonacci
sequence-- the fact
that there are
repeating sequences
shows that there's some type of
inherent structure to reality.
I mean, you can't deny that.
So he wrote the introduction to
a book called the "Elements,"
by Euclid, which was the
first big textbook on higher
mathematics that was brought to
the public, in which he says,
that mathematics is not just
a way of counting dollars
or pounds at the
time in England.
It's a way of--
>>REGINA: Quid.
>>LOUV: Yeah, exactly.
It's a way of
understanding reality.
And it's a way of
talking to God.
And he actually
says in that book--
it's so crazy-- he says that we
may have come to a time period
where there is no longer
any big revelations.
All the big revelations came to
the desert prophets long ago.
But even if we can't get divine
revelations, we have math.
And maybe that's just
as good because it's
a way of understanding
what reality actually is.
And again, I mean, I think it's
an out there way to put it.
But I don't think
mathematicians or scientists
would argue against that.
It's just said in a
slightly different language.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
would agree with you.
And maybe that was also part
of his love of astrology,
the pure mathematical
movement of the cosmos
and its interface
with the Earth.
>>LOUV: Mm-hmm.
Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Math again.
Also his work was influenced
by Hermes and the "Corpus
Hermeticum."
Maybe you can talk
about that a little bit.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
So the hermetic texts are kind
of an underground tradition
of literature,
that's been around
since the death of Christ
and before that even.
There were--
>>REGINA: Probably way before.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
I mean, it's a crazy field.
There is a hermetic text from
Egypt, from the Coptics, from--
>>REGINA: And the Egyptians
said from Atlantis.
That's down from there, to the
Egyptians, to the Coptics--
to--
yeah.
>>LOUV: Right.
And it's an interesting
literary genre.
And it's a literary genre
where there are claims
like that made, Atlantis.
And then there also
claims where-- it was
written by Hermes Trismegistus.
This turns out to be a pen name,
that a lot of different people
shared.
There was probably never
one Hermes Trismegistus.
But it's a genre
of literature that
looks at reality in the way that
I've been saying, as if it's
one thing, one substance, and
can be understood directly,
without a intermediary
of a church.
And that's a dangerous idea.
It was a dangerous idea then,
that you could understand
reality through experiment
and direct revelation,
instead of a church hierarchy
telling you what to believe.
>>REGINA: That's
what I love about it.
>>LOUV: It's dangerous now.
That's a really dangerous idea.
>>REGINA: Love it.
>>LOUV: That's really
what the Hermetica--
I mean it's an incredibly
complex literary genre.
But that's--
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
>>LOUV: --what it comes down to.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So he was influenced by
that because that was
his own approach, essentially.
>>LOUV: Absolutely.
It formed the intellectual
underpinnings, not just of
his approach, but of the
people who-- the Rosicrucians,
the people who became
the scientists.
If you think of it
this time, there's
two big competing schools
of thought, the Catholics
and Protestants.
And they're at war, these giant
titans fighting each other.
And in between, there was this
little third option, which
is the hermetics, who are--
>>REGINA: And the Rosicrucians.
>>LOUV: Right.
Well, why don't we just
actually do an experiment
to figure out what reality
is instead of fighting
over what we think it is.
And it was that underground
that became modern science.
>>REGINA: And he
wrote, ultimately,
the "Monas Hieroglyphica?"
>>LOUV: Yes.
>>REGINA: And tell us what that
is and what its influence was.
>>LOUV: So the
"Monas Hieroglyphica"
was a short text.
It's maybe 10 pages
long, 15 pages long.
And it's a book that's
synthesized everything
that he knew about the
hermetics, alchemy, astrology,
science, mathematics
into one text,
that he said has the
key to the mysteries
and explains all of reality.
And also explains
the key to alchemy,
which is what all the monarchs
in Europe wanted at this time.
And so he brought this
to several monarchs,
including the Holy Roman
Emperor Maximilian I.
He brought it to Elizabeth.
And he told them, this book
has all the secrets of alchemy.
And they said, oh, so you mean
you can make us as much gold
as we want.
>>REGINA: Always they
go to the lowest place.
>>LOUV: He said, well, no,
but I can enlighten you.
It'll bring you
spiritual wisdom.
And their response was, OK,
next, next, next, please.
>>REGINA: Oh, exactly.
OK, so how did he get into the
good graces of Queen Elizabeth
and become such a
valued advisor to her?
And what was the nature of the
kind of advice he would render?
>>LOUV: It's a
fascinating story.
So he was a loyalist to
Elizabeth during Mary's reign.
And was brought in basically
as a security guard,
as a magical security
guard to Elizabeth's court.
As soon as she seized
power, the outgoing regime
was employing all these
Catholic sorcerers, in a sense.
They were sticking--
it's a real story.
They were sticking voodoo--
making voodoo doll
of her, sticking--
all this crazy stuff, creating
propaganda campaigns to make
her look bad.
Doing all kinds of crazy
magical things, to try
and take down her court.
And so Dee was brought in
to counteract this and be
their kind of magical advisor.
But he also became the
scientific advisor.
He became the
mathematical advisor.
He was one of the people who
is instrumental in setting up
the British security services,
which later became MI5 and MI6,
with Sir Francis Walsingham.
>>REGINA: Yes, we'll
talk about too.
>>LOUV: Elizabeth
referred to him as 007.
That's the code number
which became James Bond.
>>REGINA: And Ian Fleming was
tapped into this knowledge.
>>LOUV: Yes.
Ian Fleming was a fascinating--
of course, the
author of James Bond,
who was a fascinating guy.
He was employed by, I believe,
MI6 or MI5 during World War II,
to create propaganda campaigns
to throw off the Nazi war
effort.
As part of this, he
employed Alister Crowley
to falsify astrological
charts for Rudolf Hess,
so that he would be
confused-- it's so strange.
So he would do wrong--
>>REGINA: Bad decisions.
>>LOUV: Bad decisions, right.
They never implemented the plan.
But Fleming was so taken with
this world of the occult that
when he created James Bond,
he named his creation 007.
And he also patterned Blofeld,
who's the head of Spectre,
off Crowley, the
ultimate bad guy.
>>REGINA: Right.
It is fascinating.
>>LOUV: The one
with the white cat.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I love it.
You can't make this stuff up.
It has to be born somewhere.
And apparently it
goes back to John Dee.
So John Dee, how did he
influence the development
of the field of intelligence?
>>LOUV: So during
this time, they were--
England, you have
to remember, was
a tiny, impoverished
country, that
was at the point of the stick--
at the point of a stick
of the Catholic block.
All of Europe was Catholic,
outside of England
and the Netherlands.
And they were at
extreme disadvantage.
People were starving.
They had very few
material resources.
So Elizabeth was
doing everything
she could to keep
her country going
and make sure that it survived.
And during this time, they did
set up the British intelligence
services to counteract--
you know, as part
of the war effort.
And Dee's job during
this-- it was set up
by Francis Walsingham.
And as an aside, by the way,
just for some more context,
England was so
poor at this time,
people often accused
Dee of dying of poverty.
Therefore, how he couldn't
have been such a good magician.
The reality was that everyone
was poor at this time.
Francis Walsingham, who started
the intelligence services,
financed it out
of his own pocket
because he couldn't get
paid by Elizabeth to do it.
That's how strapped
the government was.
So Dee's role in this
was getting information.
They were very
interested in collecting
all of the occult information
that was available in Europe.
He was sent to discover
this book called
the "Steganographia," to hunt
for it throughout Europe.
It was a grimoire that
promised to not only have
the secret of cryptography,
but also to contain
a magical ritual that
would allow somebody
to spy on somebody
else in the country,
to call up a vision of
what someone was doing.
>>REGINA: Well, that's what
I was going to bring up next.
I mean, they were
doing real spying,
real remote viewing,
so to speak.
>>LOUV: Remote viewing.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LOUV: Basically that's what
they were trying to figure out.
>>REGINA: Which makes
sense, because if you
don't have any resources, you
can't necessarily send people
on the ground, get them
on a train, or a donkey,
or whatever, to get where they
need to go to do the research.
So you just go direct, right?
>>LOUV: Right.
>>REGINA: And so did he have
some success, as far as you
can tell, by way of
training other agents
or being able to view?
>>LOUV: As far as I
know, he never actually
directly engaged in it.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>LOUV: They sent
him to find the book.
What he did do is he
took the techniques
and then applied them
to his later work,
scrying angels and
talking to angels.
That went into his work,
tried to basically remote view
angels, if you want to
put it in those terms.
>>REGINA: Right.
OK, so it's not surprising that
John Dee had some detractors
and even enemies.
Who were John Prestall
and Vincent Murphyn?
And why did they try
to take him down?
>>LOUV: Yes.
So these two gentlemen were
two very shady characters.
>>REGINA: Gentlemen.
[LAUGH]
>>LOUV: Yes.
They were fake
alchemists and sorcerers.
There is a real difference.
And I think it's really
important to make
this distinction because
it's important now also.
There is a real
difference between what
we might, by way of
oversimplification,
call high magic and low magic.
High magic is totally
about understanding
God in the universe.
And it's like science.
It's about becoming
spiritually--
>>REGINA: Sensing the
nature of reality.
>>LOUV: Absolutely.
And trying to become
more enlightened
and a better person.
That's it.
That's high magic.
And low magic is trying to
use magic to get your way,
or hurt somebody, or get money.
>>REGINA: Have power.
>>LOUV: Totally.
It's all these
very vulgar things,
that anyone who was
interested in high magic
would just not be
interested in at all
and be allergic to, essentially.
But there are lots of people
who are interested in it.
And there were at the time.
And these two gentlemen,
Murphyn and Prestall,
were employed by the
outgoing Catholic regime,
and also during
Queen Mary's reign,
if I remember correctly, to
attack Elizabeth and Dee using
magic.
And they fought dirty.
They used occult means,
like voodoo dolls and things
like that, to try
and attack them.
But the main thing
that they did was
try to slander their
public reputations,
by creating propaganda
to say that Dee
was a black magician
and a sorcerer
and Elizabeth was part of--
the Antichrist and all of this.
And that a woman--
or Elizabeth, a woman, and
specifically Elizabeth,
being on the throne
of England was
a sign of the end of the world.
And they really
wanted to stir up
the public against the
current ruling powers.
So it was an ongoing,
kind of gutter level war
that those two guys waged
against Dee and Elizabeth.
And it's one that
frankly Dee was not
particularly prepared
for because he
was an innocent in a way.
He was a pure and very noble
seeker after knowledge.
And he just was not prepared
for people to fight that dirty.
So he suffered from
their propaganda attacks.
His reputation
suffers to this day,
not just from their
propaganda attacks,
but by many other people,
including James I's regime,
which came in after
Elizabeth decided to sweep
all magic under the carpet.
And so Dee's reputation
has been sullied.
He was been called a black
magician and a sorcerer
when he was the
complete opposite.
And that's something that I've
tried to repair with this.
>>REGINA: Yes, clearly.
And you're doing a
beautiful job of it.
>>LOUV: Thank you.
>>REGINA: I mean,
and too, in that day,
there was no defense against it.
I mean there was
no, like, litigation
over slander in the day.
You just had to live with it.
>>LOUV: Go against
the dark arts.
>>REGINA: There was none.
And so I think
when we're talking
about these kind of
nuanced characters,
this is a good time
to bring in Edward
Kelley and his association
with Edward Kelley
and what they produced together.
>>LOUV: Yes.
>>REGINA: Because,
again, Edward was
a mixed bag of human traits.
And I just want to say
this too, a lot of people
really enjoyed the
work in the 1960s,
'70s, of Ruth Montgomery.
And her association and
her channeled source
was Arthur Ford.
Arthur Ford, who had a major
problem with alcohol and such,
even when he was a
medium in his day.
And I bring this
up because there
is a kind of, if you look at
it from a metaphysical point
of view, a type of
porosity that happens
within the auric
field, so to speak,
of people who have addictions,
that allows for a permeability,
that really other
beings can see through,
come in through very
easily compared to someone
who is super-healthy.
And they're in their zone.
It's a different deal.
That's not so permeable.
And I bring it up
because I think
it's important to understand.
That's why so many psychics,
even the best of them,
are often very flawed on
a deeply personal level.
So here we go with
Edward Kelley.
>>LOUV: That's a
fascinating-- that's
a very interesting point.
I also think that having known
a lot of psychics and mediums,
I think that a lot of
psychics and mediums
also struggle with being
that open and empathic.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>LOUV: They also struggle
with being judged by society.
And it's not an easy life.
>>REGINA: No.
>>LOUV: And so that's
something that we need to--
and I've known a lot
of psychics and mediums
with substance abuse issues.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>LOUV: And so it's
not so black and white.
>>REGINA: It's not
black and white at all.
So I just bring
that up so we can
set the stage for yet another
nuanced colorful character--
>>LOUV: Yes.
>>REGINA:
--counterfeiter and all.
>>LOUV: Absolutely.
So Dee is what we refer
to as a hard head.
So he was, as I probably--
you probably get a sense of
him from what I've been saying.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LOUV: He was
very intellectual.
He was very academic.
He was on the payroll
of the government.
He was hyperrational.
And so he did not have
any innate psychic talent.
He wasn't open.
He wasn't empathic.
He didn't have an artistic
way of viewing the world.
And so even though he was
fascinated with the theory
of magic and he spent--
all the way up to
the age of 50, he
spent all of his time
studying all the theory,
and the text, and
the academic side,
and all the little
bits and pieces.
But he, himself, his attempts
to actually make magic work
were not successful because
he couldn't go into a trance
and go into altered states.
And so what that meant was
he had to employ people
to do it with him.
He had to employ psychics.
So that he would basically
do a magical ritual to,
let's say, talk to an angel.
And then the psychic would
have the vision of the angel,
instead of him.
And he would write down
what the psychic saw.
So that's a working partnership
that's very common in magic.
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
>>LOUV: They do it all the time.
>>REGINA: Edgar Casey, and his
wife, and a lot of people, yes.
>>LOUV: OK.
So Dee had auditioned
several scryers.
A scryer is a type
of psychic that
uses a piece of crystal
or a crystal ball
as a focus to go
into a trance state.
And he had auditioned
several of them--
it was a very common role
in England at this time--
to kind of middling success.
But that changed when he met
this fascinating character,
Edward Kelley, who was
found for him by a talent
scout for psychics that
the crown had appointed.
Interesting job titles, it
was the Elizabethan age.
And Edward Kelley, he brings
a long shadow with him.
He was half Dee's
age when they met.
So he was 25 or 26, very
overweight, an alcoholic.
He had his ears cut off for
being caught forging coins.
He had been accused of
necromancy and summoning
corpses out of graves, some of
which is probably exaggerated.
And some of which may be true.
And he kind of--
Dee's writes in his diary that
the day that Kelley showed up
at Mortlake, which
was Dee's household,
the moon turned blood red.
It's like a hammer horror
movie or something.
But despite his air of
disrespectability and being
from the wrong side of the
tracks, he could do it.
He had real psychic--
>>REGINA: Talent.
>>LOUV: --talent, or
whatever it is, ability
to go into trances or
just creative imagination,
whatever it happened to be.
And Dee was so impressed
with his abilities
that he put him on payroll
for the next seven years
and had him do
essentially channeling
or psychic mediumship,
three times a day,
for the next seven years, which
was very, very hard on Kelley
and really wore him down.
It's also possible
that he may have
been using some type of
substance to facilitate that.
And keeping that type
of schedule, using--
for that long a period,
using whatever substance
it happened to be,
whatever it was,
can certainly have
a toll on somebody.
So he was very erratic.
He had his ups and downs
while in Dee's employ.
They formed a incredible
working partnership.
And they generated over a
thousand pages of records,
of scrying angels, and speaking
to various spiritual beings,
which are beautiful
and profound,
and on par or
greater in language
than perhaps even the King
James Bible, parts of them.
And incredible, even just
as a literary record.
But there were certainly parts
where Kelley became unhinged.
And it was a tumultuous
working relationship,
but a fascinating
one at a human level
between two very
different individuals, who
formed a greater whole.
>>REGINA: Well, that's
why I brought up
the difficulty of being
open to other forces.
Because at the same time, kind
of monstrous types of entities
started manifesting for
Dee and such as well.
It's almost like these were
kind of angelic things, kind
of mixed in with the hodgepodge
of some lower realm creatures.
>>LOUV: So as the sessions
went on, at the beginning
of the sessions, what--
so first of all, the
point of the sessions
was for Dee to talk to angels.
That's what he wanted.
He wanted to communicate
with angels because, you
have to remember,
this is perhaps
the smartest person of his age.
He'd been all over Europe.
He'd studied under all the
great intellectual masters
of the European universities.
He was smarter,
basically, probably
than anyone in England.
He had five times the books
of Oxford and Cambridge,
each of which had maybe
400, 500 books each.
He had 2,500 books, maybe
4,000 at one point at Mortlake,
which is probably
why he was always
broke because he's spending
all his money on books--
>>REGINA: On books.
>>LOUV: --which some of
us can empathize with.
But he got to a point
where he realized
if he wanted to know anything
more, he was going to have to,
in his mind, speak to
higher authorities.
He couldn't learn anything
more from human beings.
And so his goal was
to speak to the angels
and make contact with them, to
recover the original knowledge
of humanity.
That was his goal.
It was totally pure,
totally spiritual.
But he became involved with
these different scryers
in order to do that.
Throughout the sessions, which
lasted about seven years,
it was a real process.
It wasn't cut and dry.
What was happening was Dee and
Kelley were being tuned up.
The view of the angels,
when they manifested,
was we're going to
give you knowledge.
But before you're
worthy to receive it,
you have to be purified.
You have to be humbled.
You have to be--
all the defilements
of your souls
must be filed off or removed.
Because you can't just
receive higher knowledge.
You have to be prepared.
Even the Bible says this, right.
So many years went by,
where Dee and Kelley
were being tested, purified,
put through various intense
situations that brought
them always to greater
levels of faith and humility.
And in the beginning,
they were being confronted
by many demonic appearances.
In fact, they couldn't
yet tell the difference
between demons and angels.
But the angels showed them how.
And part of the
original sessions
were, in a sense, an exorcism,
where the angels were kicking
out all the lower forces
that they saw attached to,
not just Dee and Kelley,
but all humanity.
And Kelley himself
had spent a lot
of time doing demonic types
of magic for personal gain.
And they picked up on that.
And so most of
the early sessions
were the angels kind of pushing
Kelley around and trying
to get him shaped up, so
that he was spiritually pure
enough to receive higher wisdom.
And they have their
work cut out for him
because he was a
rough character.
But as the sessions
went on, once they
got through that period, then
it became almost purely angelic.
>>REGINA: And what was
the direction and nature
of the body of work, in summary?
And then I do want to
get into the end times
scenario, the mission to
save the 144,000 souls,
and who those actually were.
So we'll lead from one
question to the next.
>>LOUV: Right.
So when the angels
appeared, which
was pretty quickly
after Kelley showed up,
the first thing that they did,
after putting Dee and Kelley
through their
paces, is give them
a system for making deeper
contact, which is now referred
to as Enochian
magic, which is not
a term they used at the time.
It's a term later writers used.
And the Enochian
system, and language,
which was supposed to be the
language that the angels spoke
before the fall
of-- from Eden, was
to tune them up and
allow them deeper access
to the angelic realms.
Once they got through
that, the angels
made their agenda
pretty clear, which
is not different at all from
really what is in the Bible.
It was that humanity
needs to be redeemed.
They were not pleased
with the Reformation.
They weren't pleased with
the Catholic Church either.
They thought that
humanity had entered
a very debased and violent
period of history, had fallen
very far from the
original teachings that
are either from the Old
Testament or from Christ.
It's hard to argue with.
And they wanted to
directly use Dee and Kelley
as agents to advance their
vision for the world, which
is kind of intense,
or very intense.
What the angels wanted
was-- their view was,
humans have had their
chance to get it right.
They haven't got it right.
We would like to
take the wheel now,
in order to-- what we
want is a new religion.
It's a new, hermetic-based
super-religion,
combining Catholicism,
Protestantism, Judaism, Islam,
paganism even.
>>REGINA: And very
hermetic, yeah.
>>LOUV: Very hermetic.
One universal religion
of love, which
will be ministered by
the angels directly.
They wanted humans to have a
way to contact the divine realms
one on one, instead
of having to deal
with a corrupt institution.
Although they also
thought the people
should still be attached
to the body of the Church,
because it was an
important tool.
And communion was important,
and all of these things.
But they wanted almost
to directly redeem
humanity, almost
in spite of itself,
which hasn't worked
out very well.
>>REGINA: No.
They wanted a kind
of global conversion.
>>LOUV: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So they had their
work cut out for them,
proselytizing and
trying to get buy-ins
in other countries,
leadership, churches,
and so forth, not easy.
>>LOUV: Their original plan
was they wanted-- in addition
to this, they wanted one
world empire, under Elizabeth
as the sovereign,
which Dee already
laid the groundwork for.
So when you step
back and you see
that Dee is responsible
not only for creating
the British empire, which
ruled most of the planet,
but also potentially--
the plan was
to create one religion
that ruled everybody.
That's a big plan.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>LOUV: In a way,
it has come true.
I mean, I think that the British
empire, if you really step back
and you look at
the British empire,
or in some ways the
American empire,
you can definitely
see that parts of that
have perhaps influenced people.
>>REGINA: Uh-huh.
Let's get into--
I think we can just
kind of skip over.
There's one part I wanted to
get into, about Kelley's life.
Because of the lack of
funding and the constant need
for patronage, he tended to
flip allegiances, to work for,
whether it's Protestant,
Catholic, or whatnot, kind
of anybody.
In a sense, so that
he could get the funds
needed to do his real work.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
And the crazy thing is the
angels encouraged him in that.
They kind of said, look,
you're working for us now.
And you have a
direct connection.
Don't worry too much about--
>>REGINA: This petty
politics of the planet.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
Yeah.
And they were helpful
in steering him.
There were many times
that the Catholic Church--
the Jesuits probably would
have killed him multiple times.
They were trying to bring Dee
and Kelley to the Vatican,
where they probably would
have been tortured and killed
for heresy.
And there are many times where
they narrowly avoided disaster.
>>REGINA: So they
probably looked after.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
It's all there in the records.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>LOUV: It's crazy.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's get into the
144,000, the end times
scenario, 12 tribes of Israel,
new world order, all of that.
And then start getting
into the implications
of how that carried
down through history
and how it's still
playing out today
because this is really the
crux of it in a lot of ways
>>LOUV: A good question.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And we have time.
>>LOUV: OK.
>>REGINA: Big answers are good.
>>LOUV: So basically
what the angels
said is, humanity should
be directly redeemed.
And what they
thought is the events
of the Book of Revelation
need to be reenacted.
And the angels, they wanted a
salvation plan for humanity.
They thought that it was
already the end of the world
and humanity was laboring under
the reign of the Antichrist.
Which, it's interesting to think
about because we often look
at these things as literal.
Like somebody is always coming
out saying the end of the world
is next Thursday.
But if you really
step back again.
And I think that divine events,
whatever, these things probably
play out on long
timelines, even if you just
look at them as metaphorical.
The Elizabethan era was, what,
400 years ago, 500 years ago.
If you think about how
much things have crumbled
since then, the degradation
of the environment,
the pollution of
the planet, it's
hard to argue that things
aren't at least a little
bit apocalyptic.
So Dee was convinced that the
angels meant-- the angels told
him the world would end in '88.
And he thought this meant 1588.
But it seems they
meant something else.
They never said it would
be a specific date.
It seems that for
beings like that,
they probably see on
very long time-frames.
But what they wanted
was to prepare the way
for the salvation of humanity.
And their way of doing
that was this idea
of a new religion and a new--
the spread of Christianity
around the planet,
which is what happened, thanks
to the British empire-- or not,
no thanks, depending on
what your on that is.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>LOUV: And a lot
of peopled suffered.
>>REGINA: Imperialism has an
up and downside, for sure.
>>LOUV: A lot of
people suffered.
>>REGINA: Yes, a lot.
>>LOUV: So that's
kind of what happened.
And when the British empire
spread around the planet,
it was with that mythology.
Whether that comes from
Dee directly is arguable.
But he certainly
had an influence.
And the ideology of
the British Empire
was spreading Christianity,
and thereby civilization,
around the planet.
And thereby saving people,
even at sword point.
When global power transferred
to the American empire
after the British empire
fell around World War I,
the story was the same.
America, particularly if you
look at the evangelical right
in America.
There was a PEW
Forum study in 2006
that said that one
in three Americans
believes that Jesus will
return in our lifetimes.
And it's far from
being a fringe belief.
It's, in fact, probably the
dominant belief in America.
>>REGINA: If you drive
across the country
and listen to the only stations
that have any wattage, which
are Christian radio stations,
fundamentalist Christian radio
stations, you hear the talk a
lot as you're driving along.
I mean, it's kind of shocking if
you're not part of that group.
>>LOUV: Right.
Yeah.
And you look at things
like the success
of the Left Behind
books, which are
the most popular
books in America,
I think outside of the Bible,
more than Stephen King.
So literalism, fundamentalist
literalism, it's a big--
and it's not just the public.
It's also, I think, that
apocalyptic literalism
has been a driving force
in both British and then
American politics.
Absolutely in American politics
for the last 100 years.
>>REGINA: That's
what I was going
to ask you because elite power
circles, this really factors
hugely in, almost like
in the belief it's
best for all concerned to
hasten the end of times.
And that's a danger.
That's dangerous.
And that's what we're
dealing with right now.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
I mean you look at--
during the Reagan
administration,
Reagan believed that it was
his divinely appointed gift,
as inspired by Hal
Lindsay, who was
a famous Christian
writer in the '70s,
that it was the
end of the world.
And his divinely appointed
role was to hasten or shepherd
humanity through the end of
days and the fight with Gog
and Magog, which was Russia.
And that he was God's directly
chosen appointee to do that.
Now, this seems a
little eccentric
until you realize that this was
a game that was and is being
played with nuclear weapons.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>LOUV: I mean,
this was something
that was enacted as mutually
assured destruction.
And during the second Bush--
or Bush Two, the Bush,
Jr., administration,
George Bush, also very
influenced by Billy Graham,
by the evangelicals, believed
that it was his divine mission
to hasten the
apocalypse by going
to war in the Middle East.
He famously attempted to elicit
the support of Jacques Chirac,
in France, in the war effort,
by telling him that he saw--
he'd had a vision in prayer
that he'd seen Gog and Magog
at work in the Middle East.
This is perhaps
not who we should
have steering the ship in a 21st
century technological society.
But it's certainly--
>>REGINA: It's still there.
It's still there.
It's steering the ship.
>>LOUV: But we need to
understand it because it's--
to dismiss it, I
think would also
be a mistake because so
many people believe it.
And I'm always of the opinion--
I've long been of the opinion,
as a journalist and a writer,
if you want to
understand why people
do the things that
they do, you have
to look at what they believe.
And you have to
take it seriously
at least that they
take it seriously,
and not be dismissive
or look down at it.
I think that if we
want to understand
each other as human beings,
we need to understand
each other's beliefs.
You can't understand why
the evangelical right does
what it does without
understanding
the script they're following.
And so I think for that
reason, it's important to--
for that reason and
many more, I think
it's important to understand.
>>REGINA: I think so, too.
And I just recently interviewed
an author named Mark Stavish.
And he had written
about egregores.
And when you speak about
the notion of an egregore,
perhaps one of the biggest, most
powerful egregores in existence
is the end times notion.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so that does
have a life of its own
and does feed back to those
who are in positions of power
in decision making.
>>LOUV: Absolutely, and
it's not just Christianity.
>>REGINA: No.
>>LOUV: All of the world
religions have that.
>>REGINA: Well, the
fundamentalist world religions
in particular, yes.
>>LOUV: Yeah.
And it's interesting.
You know, I read a lot of
material from people who were
in Bush, Jr.'s White House and
things like that, and Reagan's.
And it's not just
Republicans, by the way.
It's Democrats as well.
It's on both sides.
As people get closer to--
it's a mythology that's very
appealing to people in power
because it grants them a sense
of having a special divine
role to play on the world stage.
And even people who don't
start out as very evangelical
become very interested
in that way of thinking,
which is understandable.
It's just something that's been
with humanity for a long time.
Again, it's not
just Christianity.
It's lots of
different religions.
My personal view
is yes-- and, we
should focus on also some
sustainability plans.
Like, if the world
doesn't end, maybe we
should make sure of things
are OK during the end times.
>>REGINA: Right.
I'm in your camp.
Nice to make some
better plans than that.
So let's get down
to the notion--
we have about five minutes
left to kind of wrap this.
Let's get down to the notion.
These people who are
power elite believe
that they are among the
ones who will be saved.
They are always among the
chosen ones, no matter what.
And so who are the 144,000?
How was that originally
put out in Dee's day?
>>LOUV: So in the
Book of Revelations,
there's a bit about
the 144,000 that
will be saved at the
end of the world.
Elaine Pagels, who's a
fascinating and brilliant
scholar on gnosticism, has a
very interesting take on this,
where having examined the
original political context
of this--
the evangelical Christians
will not like this.
The Book of Revelation was
written by John of Patmos
during the time following
the death of Christ,
from a very different
perspective of the rest
of the New Testament.
The point she makes
very convincingly
is that following
the death of Christ,
there were actually
two different factions
of Christians.
There were the Jewish converts
to the new religion of-- or it
wasn't even a new religion.
There were the Jewish people
who believed that Christ
was the Jewish messiah.
And then many who
did not, which is now
the mainstream view of Judaism,
There were also--
when Saul of Tarsus
had his conversion on
the road to Damascus
and became St. Paul, long
after the death of Christ,
he said that he was given a
vision that he should open up
the covenant to all
nations, meaning
the original covenant between
Moses and the Jewish people.
And that this was for everyone.
And that it had to be opened.
And so he then became the
head of this new thing
called Christianity,
which has now
become the most successful
religion in world history.
But what he did was convert
Greek and Roman pagans,
and even people from North
Africa, to this new religion.
This was not-- you can imagine
the Jewish people who followed,
accepted Christ as the messiah,
being like, hey, wait a minute.
That's not what this is about.
Christ was here to fulfill
the covenant with us.
It wasn't to be
open to all people.
And so what you have
in the New Testament
is the Pauline Letters, which
are from the camp following
St. Paul.
And then you have
Revelation, which
was written from the perspective
of the Jewish followers
of Christ.
And in the Book of
Revelation, when
they talk about the
144,000 to be saved,
what that originally meant was
the Jewish followers of Christ.
And that everyone else
was not to be saved,
which is contentious.
>>REGINA: Contentious,
to say the least.
OK.
So now, that's been
kind of flipped.
And if you listen to
the Jehovah Witness,
then it's a whole
different story again.
>>LOUV: Sure.
Everyone's got their story.
>>REGINA: Everybody's
their story of the 144,000.
>>LOUV: Isn't religion fun?
>>REGINA: Isn't it fun?
So we have just a couple
minutes left to take it back
into this kind of larger story.
How would you wrap this part--
we literally have two minutes--
wrap this part of the story
back into John Dee
and his contributions?
>>LOUV: I think that it's
important to understand
that this time
period-- the ideas
that were formulated in this
time period are still with us.
I see John Dee as like
a computer programmer
who created the computer code
that our society is running on.
And to understand
that code, and perhaps
to change it and update
it for the modern world,
we should understand
where it came from.
And I particularly think--
I would particularly
like to underline
that the apocalyptic idea
is much more dangerous to us
as a species now that
we have nuclear weapons.
>>REGINA: I know that.
>>LOUV: Now that we have
nanotechnology, biotechnology,
the ability to kill people
many, many times over,
everyone, all life,
when we're at the brink
of ecological collapse.
So perhaps we need a--
John Dee created one myth.
Perhaps we need a
new one that's--
>>REGINA: A counter myth.
>>LOUV: --a bit more
supportive-- yes-- of life.
>>REGINA: I couldn't agree more.
And is it-- can we get our hands
on the "Monas Hieroglyphica?"
>>LOUV: Sure.
Yeah.
You can find it online.
It's freely available as a PDF.
>>REGINA: And would you
recommend we all read it?
>>LOUV: I would say,
start with "John Dee
and the Empire of Angels,"
to get it in context.
It's very opaque if you
don't know the context.
>>REGINA: I was going to say,
if you did all that in 10 pages,
we need to read your book first.
And I hear your book
is doing fabulously.
>>LOUV: It's doing very well.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: Wow, you went through
four printings, how quickly?
>>LOUV: In the first month.
>>REGINA: In the
first month, wow.
Well, you know why,
you deserve it.
You did your job right.
>>LOUV: Thank you.
>>REGINA: And thank
you for trying
to put some truth around
the legend of this man.
>>LOUV: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Again,
the name of the book
is "John Dee and the
Empire of Angels,"
which is available through
all major booksellers.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]